From The New York Times,
>> [music]
>> I'm Rachel Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> Thousands of pages of newly released
emails between Jeffrey Epstein and his
friends and [music] associates have put
the financiers relationship with
President Trump back into the spotlight.
[music]
Today, my colleagues David Enrich and
Michael Gold on what these new documents
tell [music] us and whether they could
trigger the release of the rest of the
Epstein files.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday, November 13th.
So David, you're back on the show to
talk to us about the latest chapter in
this ongoing saga about the relationship
between Donald Trump and Jeffrey
Epstein. And today, Wednesday, it seems
like there was a very meaningful update
to our understanding about that
relationship. But can you just break it
down for us how significant were the
revelations that came out today?
Extremely significant, I would say.
Okay, walk us through what happened.
So we woke up this morning to the news
that Democrats on the House Oversight
Committee had released three emails from
Jeffrey Epstein's email account in which
he and others were talking about Donald
Trump. And the emails appeared to show
that Epstein
recognized that he had some important
information about his relationship with
Trump and Trump's relationship with
women or girls. And
just as we were all starting to kind of
decipher the cryptic wording in those
messages, the Republicans on the House
Oversight Committee one-upped their
Democratic counterparts and released
additional Epstein-related emails, many
of which are also about Donald Trump or
at least mentioned Donald Trump. And so
we've been spending
what feels like an eternity today going
through these emails one by one, reading
them, trying to make sense of them, and
trying to understand their implications
for Trump and his administration. Okay,
let's go one by one and start with the
beginning of the day, the first emails
that you saw. Can you tell us what those
emails were? Sure, I can read them to
you. I've got them in front of me if you
want me to. Yes, please. Okay, so
there's three of them. The first is from
April of 2011. And this is a time, just
contextually, when Epstein had only
recently been released from house arrest
as part of his punishment for having
solicited prostitution from a minor.
He's seeking to kind of repair his
reputation and he's thinking about
trying to get his guilty plea
overturned. And he writes to his
long-time associate, Ghislaine Maxwell.
>> [snorts]
>> "I want you to realize that the dog that
has not barked is Trump." And then
there's a victim's name redacted. "She
spent hours at my house with him. He has
never once been mentioned."
Ghislaine Maxwell responds, "I have been
thinking about that." Mhm.
>> [clears throat]
>> And Trump at this point is a reality TV
star in 2011 who has these vague and
kind of unrealistic presidential
ambitions, but it's a little unclear why
at that point Epstein thought that the
information he had on Trump
was relevant. And so we are all left
wondering exactly what this means. And
just so I understand, "The dog that
hasn't barked is Trump" means or implies
that there's some kind of information
that hasn't been made public. And so
this email is interesting because it
suggests that
Epstein knows things about Trump. Do I
have that right? As best we can tell,
yes, that is right. Epstein appears to
believe that he has some information on
Trump that has not yet become public and
that could be useful to Epstein. Or at
least he's trying to portray that he
does.
Yes, that's right. So what's the next
email?
So the next email is from December of
2015 and it's between Epstein and a
journalist named Michael Wolff, who is
quite a prominent journalist who had
clearly spent a lot of time with
Epstein. And this takes place right as
CNN is planning to air a debate
involving the Republican presidential
candidates, including Trump. And Wolff,
he says he hears that CNN is going to
ask Trump about his relationship with
Epstein. Epstein then responds, "If we
were able to craft an answer for him,
what do you think it should be?"
Wolff then responds to that in a very
telling way, which is, "I think you
should let him hang himself. If he says
he hasn't been on the plane or to the
house, then that gives you a valuable PR
and political currency. You can hang him
in a way that potentially generates a
positive benefit for you. Or if it
really looks like he could win, you
could save him, generating a debt." Mhm.
And so he's floating this idea that
Epstein has enough of the kind of the
goods on Donald Trump that he can almost
cultivate him as someone who's in his
debt and that he can then presumably
cash that debt in at a relevant point in
the future.
Michael Wolff, of course, is a
journalist who's authored multiple books
about President Trump. What do you make
of the fact that it seems like he is
giving Epstein PR advice in this moment?
This is not the way that journalists
traditionally operate. We regard sources
as sources, not as clients. And it
appears that he is giving not just some
advice to Epstein, but really kind of
sitting alongside him, coaching him on
how he can use information that he has
on a major party presidential candidate
as leverage. To say this is a violation
of traditional journalistic ethics and
standards would be an understatement.
Aside from the questionable journalistic
ethics of Michael Wolff, this exchange
seems to suggest something similar to
the first email you read, right? That
Epstein has something on Trump or at
least is trying to show that he does.
But just to be clear, we don't know
what, if anything, Epstein actually had
over Trump. We know that he was making
it seem like he had some kind of
leverage, but we don't actually know
whether he had any information that
Trump would have legitimately been
concerned about, right? Well, I'm not
sure that is right. Look, the
relationship between Epstein and Trump,
we know a lot about it now in 2025, but
back a decade ago, we knew next to
nothing about it. And what we now know
is that Trump in the '80s and '90s and
into the early 2000s was pretty good
friends with Epstein and they were
moving in the same social circles. They
were both pursuing at points some of the
same young women. So you know, at this
point in Trump's career in 2015, he is
obviously very well known, but a lot of
the things that have come to define him
and his relationships with women, such
as the Carroll allegations or the Access
Hollywood tape, all of that stuff was in
the future at this point. And so I think
from Epstein's perspective, the fact
that he has a lot of experience having
been around Trump and seeing him
interacting with women, I think that
that is the kind of thing that Epstein
sitting there in 2015 can see as
potentially very useful information that
he could use to gain some sort of
leverage over this guy who is all of the
sudden a leading candidate to become
president of the United States.
Okay, tell us about the final email that
House Democrats released on Wednesday
morning.
Yeah, so this one is maybe the most
cryptic of the bunch. This is another
email from Epstein to Michael Wolff.
It's written in early 2019, so several
months before Epstein was arrested for
the final time. And what we see in the
email is there's apparently a victim's
name, which is redacted. Then it says
Mar-a-Lago.
Then there's something else that's
redacted. And then it says, "Trump said
he asked me to resign. Never a member
ever."
"Of course he knew about the girls as he
asked Ghislaine to stop."
And [snorts] so there's a certain amount
here that we know contextually what he's
referring to. And Trump has said
publicly that he severed ties with
Epstein because Epstein, quote, "stole a
girl from Mar-a-Lago." And that's a
reference to Virginia Giuffre, who was a
spa assistant at Mar-a-Lago who became
one of Epstein's victims.
And Trump has said repeatedly that he
threw Epstein out as a member of
Mar-a-Lago. So this is very clearly
Epstein telling Wolff, for reasons that
are not entirely clear,
that Trump had full awareness of what
Epstein was doing and the fact,
apparently the fact that he and his
associates were recruiting young women
and perhaps girls from Mar-a-Lago into
their sex trafficking operation. Is
Epstein basically saying here Trump is
lying because I was never a member to
begin with of Mar-a-Lago, so therefore,
if he says that he kicked me out, that's
not true?
>> saying that, but to me the the bigger
sentence is, "Of course he knew about
the girls." Mhm. And obviously, Trump
has denied having any knowledge of the
sex trafficking operation. And so this
would appear to be
a refutation of that argument. Now,
again, it's very important to remember
that Epstein is a notorious liar and
manipulator. And so we really just don't
know if this is true, but it clearly
shows that Epstein is telling other
people that Trump had knowledge about
what was going on. And again, it's not
clear why he was telling this to Michael
Wolff. We've obviously tried to speak to
Michael Wolff and everyone else who were
writing about in these emails today.
Wolff has not responded to our requests
today. Others have also not responded
and some have just declined to comment.
You mentioned Ghislaine Maxwell, who is
currently serving prison time for
helping Epstein with his sex trafficking
operation. And earlier this year, she
told the Justice Department that she had
never seen Donald Trump in a, quote,
"inappropriate setting."
Does anything in these emails contradict
that statement?
I'm not sure I would use the word
contradict, but there's certainly some
tension here. I mean, in the 2011 email
that Epstein sent to Maxwell, so he
refers to an unknown victim as having
spent hours at my house, meaning
Epstein's house, with Trump. And Maxwell
responds to that, "I have been thinking
about that." And that certainly implies
that Maxwell knew about something that
was going on with Trump. There are
potentially some, I guess, plausible
explanations in which that does not
contradict what she said this summer to
the Justice Department, but there
certainly on their face does seem to be
some tension.
Okay, so you've just walked us through
the three emails released by Democrats.
What happened next? What happened next
is that the Republicans on the House
Oversight Committee released, by our
best count, more than 20,000 pages of
emails from Jeffrey Epstein's Gmail
account. We're, frankly, I would say
we're maybe a third or a quarter of the
way through going through all these
emails. So, I do not know what the
totality of it is going to show, but so
far the main takeaway is that it's
really clear that for years after Trump
severed his ties with Epstein,
Epstein was still really focused on
Trump. And it seemed like for at least
two reasons. One is that he was trying
to hurt Donald Trump. He was disparaging
his businesses. He was disparaging
Trump's character.
But secondly, especially in later years,
Epstein appeared to think that he had
some potential leverage over Trump at a
time when the federal government, which
was run by Donald Trump, was criminally
investigating Epstein. And so, we see
emails where Epstein is calling Trump a
dope and demented. But we also see
emails where he is urging his lawyer or
his financial advisor to dig into
Trump's finances. We know from other
reporting that Epstein was constantly
trying to portray himself as having
access to people that maybe he didn't
actually have access to or he wasn't as
close with as he portrayed. And
it seems here in all of these emails
that we've seen so far that he's trying
to leverage the perception of his
proximity to Donald Trump, right? And I
just wonder based on what we know about
how transactional Epstein was,
how much stock should we put into the
way that Epstein is portraying his
relationship to Donald Trump?
Well, I don't think anyone should ever
put much stock into what Jeffrey Epstein
says or writes. He is a complete liar
with a really clear pattern of
manipulating people for his own gain and
exaggerating his connections to powerful
people. That said, we have, through our
reporting and other news organizations'
reporting, we've clearly established
over and over again that Trump and
Epstein were quite close for a period of
time.
>> [music]
>> But to me, the takeaway of these emails
is not so much what they reveal about
Epstein's relationship with Trump as
much as they reveal that Epstein, who
was always an opportunist and always
looking for an edge over people, was
doing that here with Trump.
He could sense, I think, that the walls
were closing in on him and that his
life, his freedom were on the line.
And he was desperate to find any edge,
any advantage he could grab. And one of
those edges was Trump. It was this
long-ago relationship, but it still, in
Epstein's eyes, had value to him as he
tried to evade the criminal justice
system.
>> [music]
>> David, thank you so much.
Thank you, Rachel.
>> [music]
>> After the break, I talked to our
colleague Michael Gold about the fight
on Capitol Hill over the Epstein files
and the push to release even more
documents.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Michael Gold, thank you so much for
joining us from what looks like a phone
booth on Capitol Hill. Is that where you
are? Yes, I'm in a phone booth,
basically. It's a it's a closet, more or
less. Well, thank you for finding a
quiet space for us. We wanted to talk to
you after we've just talked to David
Enrich about what we learned from these
more than 20,000 pages worth of emails
from Jeffrey Epstein. And I want to ask
you, somebody who's been covering this
saga from Capitol Hill,
to explain to us why these emails have
been released and where exactly we are
in the long journey of trying to get all
of the Epstein files released.
So, the story here on Capitol Hill
actually begins months ago in July. And
at the time, a lot of lawmakers here
were very unhappy that the Trump
administration had backtracked, in their
view, on a promise to release the files.
And so, two lawmakers, Representative Ro
Khanna, a Democrat from California, and
Thomas Massie, a Republican from
Kentucky, decide that they're going to
introduce a bill that would force the
Justice Department to release the
Epstein files.
At the same time, there's a lot of
skepticism that this bill will actually
ever come to a vote. And so, Democrats
on the House Oversight Committee use the
committee to begin forcing subpoenas on
the Epstein investigation. And it
eventually expands to include
Republicans who want to see additional
subpoenas and are interested in getting
more information released. So, you have
a bill that would force the Justice
Department to release the files and an
investigation coming out of the
Oversight Committee that's a larger
investigation into Jeffrey Epstein,
Ghislaine Maxwell, and how the Trump
administration handled the case.
So, just to be clear, there are two
parallel efforts going on here. One is
to get the DOJ to release the files, and
the other one is from this House
Oversight Committee to get more
information about Jeffrey Epstein and
his relationship to these powerful
figures, including President Donald
Trump. That's right. And one telling
detail, I think, about this whole saga
that gets us to today is that Speaker
Mike Johnson does not want to support
this bill. He opposes a bill that would
force the Trump administration to do
anything on the Epstein files. But as he
is opposing the bill, he points to this
investigation the Oversight Committee is
doing frequently and says, "Well, this
is the avenue that we need to take if we
want to get full transparency here."
Okay, so the read on this is basically
that Johnson is supportive of the House
Oversight Committee's efforts, but not
supportive of the efforts to force the
DOJ to turn over other documents, right?
That's right. And so, because the White
House and Republican leadership are
opposed to this bipartisan bill, Thomas
Massie and Ro Khanna filed what's known
as a discharge petition. And the
shorthand for a discharge petition is
that if 218 members of the House, which
is a majority of the body, agree on any
one particular issue, they can force the
House to vote on a bill.
And so, Speaker Johnson essentially says
we don't need to do this. We don't need
to force a vote that would circumvent
leadership. We can look at the Oversight
Committee and their investigation, and
they'll do the work for us.
And what ends up happening is the
Oversight Committee gets all of these
documents from Jeffrey Epstein's estate.
And it's the information in those
materials that they end up releasing
today.
So, let's just pause for a second. The
Democrats released three emails first
before this trove of 20,000. So, why did
they choose to take that step?
So, if you ask them, they'll tell you
that they got these particular documents
a few days ago. It took them time to go
through and redact information and
decide that these needed to come out
today. That's the stated reason. But I
think there's also political dynamics at
play as there often are here on Capitol
Hill. Today is the day that the House is
voting to end the government shutdown.
And House Democrats are really unhappy
with the deal that the Senate made. They
think it makes them look weak, that they
didn't get what they wanted. And the
release of these emails,
intentionally or not, has changed and
shifted the conversation on Capitol Hill
so that the Epstein saga has become the
focus again.
But it's very clear that Republicans,
President Trump, and the White House all
want to be talking about the fact that
Republicans ended the shutdown without
Democrats having to make major
concessions. And instead, a significant
amount of their time today has been
spent talking about Jeffrey Epstein and
his relationship with President Trump.
So, if Republicans had an incentive to
keep the focus on the end of the
shutdown, why did they then release
20,000-plus files on Jeffrey Epstein?
So, earlier this morning, House
Republicans and the White House argued
that Democrats were cherry-picking
documents and selectively choosing
documents from this trove in order to
present a specific narrative.
And so, they released 20,000 documents
from the Epstein estate to make the
point that there's way more in the files
than just these three emails.
Throughout their investigation, House
Republicans have been making the case
that their Epstein investigation is not
just about Trump, but about a host of
political elites and powerful figures,
including President Clinton, who they
repeatedly focused on.
But as we just learned from David
Enrich, the 20,000 documents did have a
lot in there about President Trump. And
basically just like reinforce the idea
that Epstein was fixated on Trump in
many ways and raise a lot of questions
about the relationship between these two
men. So, if the intent was for
Republicans to detract attention away
from the singular relationship between
Trump and Epstein, it does not seem like
that, at least today, had that desired
effect.
That's right. And I think it was always
going to be hard to change the focus
away from Epstein's relationship with
the president because if you remember
how we got here in the first place is
that the Justice Department, after
promising to release these files and and
insisting that they would release these
files, decided not to. And so, there
were always questions about Trump's
relationship with Epstein
and what might have been in the files.
But there was a sense in which today was
always going to be about Epstein in some
way anyway. How so? So, 7 weeks ago, an
Arizona Democrat named Adeline Grijalva
won a special election to fill a seat
that was left vacant after her father
died in office.
And during her campaign, Grijalva said
that as soon as she got to Capitol Hill,
one of the first things she would do is
sign on to this discharge petition. And
that is the thing that you mentioned
earlier where if enough people sign on,
they can force a vote that bypasses the
speaker on whether or not to release the
Epstein files, correct?
That's right.
When Grijalva won, it looked like this
petition might finally succeed.
The problem was that when Grijalva won
her election, the House was in recess
and Speaker Mike Johnson refused to see
her until the recess was over, which
would not happen until there was a deal
to end the shutdown. So, obviously
Wednesday was the day that she was going
to be seated, the shutdown was finally
ending. What happens next? So, Speaker
Johnson says that he'll swear Adeline
Grijalva in at 4:00 p.m. on Wednesday
and that sets a deadline. At this point,
the discharge petition has 217
signatures. Grijalva would be the 218th.
Of the people on the petition, four of
them are Republicans. That's Thomas
Massie and three Republican women, Nancy
Mace, Lauren Boebert, and Marjorie
Taylor Greene.
Essentially,
this 4:00 p.m. deadline kicks off a
last-minute pressure campaign by the
White House who had been lobbying these
Republicans for months to pull their
names from the petition.
But this doesn't work. They all say
they're going to stay on the petition
and at 4:00 p.m. today, Adeline Grijalva
gets sworn in and the first thing she
does after she finishes is signs this
petition. So, what happens next? How
quickly might we actually see the DOJ
documents? So, that's one of the
interesting things about this effort
here. You know, theoretically, we could
see a vote on the House floor
sometime in December. It could be
earlier depending on how the speaker
decides to maneuver here.
But even if this bill comes to the House
floor and passes in a vote, which it
probably will because it already has the
support of the majority of the House,
the legislation would still have to go
to the Senate, which
might not even ever have to take it up.
And if it were to somehow get passed by
the Senate, then it would get sent to
the president who it seems very clear
from his public remarks would probably
veto this and send it back to Congress.
So, what you're saying is basically this
could die in the Senate, but even if it
didn't die in the Senate, even if it got
to the president's desk, what would the
point of that be? He's not going to push
this through.
Yeah, it's a great question and I think
one of the outstanding things that a lot
of people here are wondering is why the
White House whipped so hard against this
once it became obvious that this effort
would succeed.
I think a lot of this is about politics.
It's embarrassing to the White House to
have members of the president's own
party vote for a bill that essentially
rebukes his administration and tries to
compel them to do something that they
insisted they wouldn't do.
And because so many on the right have
been clamoring for the release of the
Epstein files, there was always a sense
that if this actually ever came to the
floor, it would not be just a simple
majority vote, but that a lot of
Republicans would feel like they had no
choice but to support it to keep their
base happy.
And that is a difficult position both
for Republicans and for the president to
be in
because it makes it look like the
president is losing favor with members
of his own party.
Obviously, there is a long history of
Republicans who go against President
Trump getting defenestrated from
Washington.
But Republicans also just lost a bunch
of elections last week. The president's
approval is very low. Lawmakers are very
aware that Jeffrey Epstein is an issue
that has divided the MAGA movement and
President Trump's supporters and it's an
issue where many of Trump's supporters
want a lot of transparency. So, wouldn't
you expect to see more Republicans
voting to release these documents?
I think we will see more Republicans
than the four who have already signed on
to this effort vote to release these
documents. You're right to say that
lawmakers, especially Republicans on
Capitol Hill, are often worried about
invoking the wrath of the president,
especially as we head into midterm
elections and as we head into primary
season. But I think there's a different
and important political calculation
here. On the one hand, there's voting
with the president and voting against
the president. But on the other hand,
Republicans don't want to be seen as
recording a vote that would shield
Jeffrey Epstein from further
transparency.
But the Epstein story just hasn't gone
away, has it? It is a story that has
dogged President Trump and just to step
back for a minute, I kind of wonder why
you think that is. Why is this a story
that just won't go away?
The story of Jeffrey Epstein is one that
prompts a lot of questions about the
kind of things that President Trump has
put at the heart of his campaign, about
whether there is a powerful group of
elites whose interests are perceived as
being more important than the interests
of the people.
Trump ran on a campaign of of ending the
deep state, of draining the swamp.
But now he's in charge and he's the one
who appears to be shielding these files
and keeping them out of view of the
American people.
I think [snorts] it's an example of a
time when President Trump has tapped
into these cultural forces, but now that
he's in the highest office of the land,
they are turning in a direction that he
didn't expect.
Michael, just to step back for a second
and talk about the larger context this
is all happening in.
It feels as though the lesson over and
over again
in recent elections has been that the
electorate, the American people, care
about affordability. They care about the
cost of living. They care about
healthcare. We saw Democrats win big up
and down the ballot recently, also about
affordability in many respects.
President [snorts] Trump won the most
recent presidential elections in large
part because people cared about the
economy more than any other issues that
the Democrats were pressing. So, it
feels really remarkable that after all
of this, Democrats are focusing on
Jeffrey Epstein. So, what do you make of
that? I think for Democrats,
they are connecting this issue to
affordability.
You know, they've been saying for a
while that President Trump and
Republicans are protecting the interests
of elites, of billionaires and that
they're not looking out for the regular
people.
And they see the Epstein issue as part
of that, as another case of President
Trump protecting billionaires rather
than providing transparency that people
really want.
But the other thing here is that this
issue is one of the first times that
Democrats have successfully been able to
split Republicans and to divide some of
them from President Trump.
And so, even though they just had these
big wins in New Jersey and Virginia and
New York that many attributed to a
message of affordability, [music]
this is a case where they can't resist
an opportunity to poke at the Republican
Party,
make them look weak, [music]
and put them on the defense.
Michael Gold, thank you so much.
Thank you.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> The House gave final passage to a
spending package to reopen the
government,
>> [music]
>> triggering the end to the
longest-running shutdown in the nation's
history.
The vote came on day 43 of the shutdown
and days after eight Democratic [music]
senators broke their own party's
blockade and joined Republicans in
allowing the spending measure to move
forward.
It was the first time the House had held
a vote in nearly 2 [music] months.
And
the American penny died on Wednesday.
It was 232 years old.
The cause [music] was irrelevance and
expensiveness, the Treasury Department
said.
Nothing could [music] be bought anymore
with a penny, not even penny candy, and
the cost to mint the penny had risen to
more than 3 cents.
The final pennies [music] were minted on
Wednesday afternoon in Philadelphia.
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Rob Zipko, Alex Stern, and Rochelle
Bongiorno.
It was edited by Page Cowett and Lexi
Diao.
>> [music]
>> Contains music by Dan Powell and Marion
Lozano and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for [music] the daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.